Create 19-04-23_writeup.md (#205)
very-good-science/data-ethics-club: site/write_ups/2023/19-04-23_writeup.md

# Data Ethics Club: [Social Biases in NLP Models as Barriers for Persons with Disabilities](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.00813.pdf)

```{admonition} What's this? 
This is summary of Wednesday 19th April's Data Ethics Club discussion, where we spoke and wrote about [Social Biases in NLP Models as Barriers for Persons with Disabilities](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.00813.pdf), a paper written by Ben Hutchinson, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Denton, Kellie Webster, Yu Zhong, Stephen Denuyl.
The summary was written by Huw Day and Jessica Woodgate, who tried to synthesise everyone's contributions to this document and the discussion. "We" = "someone at Data Ethics Club". 
Nina Di Cara and Natalie Thurlby helped with the final edit.
```

## Discussion

### Opening thoughts

A lot of us did not enjoy this paper and were skeptical about aspects of it, particuarly those on sentiment analysis. We did however enjoy the discussion after the fact. 

> We wondered how do you define disability? How do you define conversations around different physical disabilities? Who makes these 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We wondered how do you define disability? How do you define conversations around different physical disabilities? Who gets to make these distinctions? This is a classic problem of trying to apply the fairly rigid contraints of AI to a socially/culturally defined problem.
```

#### Accessibility Issues for Marginalised Groups

Already marginalised people could be prevented from commenting/tweeting/making videos. People will get around some of these checks to some extent with workarounds, e.g. unalive, le$$bean. How fast can sentiment analysis adapt? Is it faster than human moderators?

Is there an access issue? The time you need to make an input in any system can be more precious for disabled people. Disabled people are already at a disadvantage on these systems such as Twitter/Reddit/TikTok. Disabled people are less likely to report things as toxic because of this time pressure. People have a limited number of ["spoons" or "spell slots"](www.medium.com/collected-blog-posts-of-a-bipolar-author/spell-slots-and-spoon-theory-f9481abaacd6). 

> Getting feedback is difficult here by virtue of it being extra effort for those affected to self advocated For example in the case of "long covid" (3 months or longer). After 12 months, x% of people are recovered - or have they just stopped engaging with healthcare? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting feedback is difficult here by virtue of it being extra effort for those affected to self advocate. For example in the case of "long covid" (3 months or longer). After 12 months, x% of people are recovered - or have they just stopped engaging with healthcare? 
```

Deborah Lupton examines ‘the digital patient experience economy’ in [The Commodification of Patient Opinion](www.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/1467-9566.12109) which is relevant to this discussion.

The concept of sexual harrassment in the workplace is an example of [hermeneutic injustice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epistemic_injustice) when someone's experiences are not well understood — by themselves or by others. It can also be that you've internalised mistreatment so you can't see it. Hermeneutics is the science of interpretation. A good book on this topic is: :sparkles: [Epistemic Injustice by Miranda Fricker](https://academic.oup.com/book/32817)

Silencing already marginalised voices by stopping people having a space to talk to speak to each other and stopping other people from hearing from them. It reinforces the medical model of disability versus the social model, creating a feedback loop.

> Capitalism devalues disabled people because they are often less able to make money. If only there was something we could do about that...

Reviewer: hahahaha
